AudioQuake, Level Description Language and distributed software -- Licences
===========================================================================

**Note:** only certain components of the game and supporting tools are
distributed under a "Free Software" licence. Some parts, which are
downloaded during compilation/installation, were not developed by us and
are owned by their respective developers.

This file aims to clarify the licencing terms that AudioQuake, Level
Description Language (LDL) and the supporting data and programs
distributed with them fall under. It exists to make sure that you're
completely aware of what you (and we) can and can't do with the
software. Each section describes a component of the AudioQuake and LDL
distribution and the licence used for it.

Quake Data Files
----------------

There are two types of Quake data file -- the shareware data (mostly
contained in "pak0.pak") and the registered data (mostly contained in
"pak1.pak"). Both types of data cannot be modified. They are owned by id
Software. The shareware data can be redistributed as-is (and the build
scripts do this when compiling the application bundle) but the
registered data cannot.

The Quake data files constitute the Quake sounds, models, textures,
maps, miscellaneous 2D graphics, original Quake text files (such as the
README, MANUAL and TECHINFO files), DOS/Windows game executables, VXD,
BAT and DLL files and the original Quake game code (not used by
AudioQuake but distributed as part of the Quake data files).

mindgrid:audio Quake Sound Files
--------------------------------

Please visit http://www.mindabuse.com/mindgrid/audio/quake/ for more
information (and to give feedback) after reading this file.

These sounds upgrade the ones in Quake to give you a truly visceral
experience :-). Note that the documentation supplied with the
distribution points out that the sounds are licenced material and are
not to be redistributed outside of their original form (the build
scripts download a compressed version of the
`mindgrid-audio_quake_2003.02.22/` directory and extract it for you).
These sounds are not to be used for modifying anything but Quake,
either. The aforementioned directory contains both README files, which
echo the information given on the web site above.

ZQuake
------

This is the QuakeWorld game engine on which AudioQuake is based. It is
distributed under the GNU General Public Licence (GPL). For more
information, please read the COPYING file.

AudioQuake (The Program)
------------------------

Our modified gamecode (the .dat files in "agrip/"), maps (files in
"agrip/maps") and sounds (files in and under the "agrip/sounds"
directory) fall under this category. It is the code and data that we
have added to the ZQuake QuakeWorld engine, game code and original Quake
data to make it accessible. The licence used here is the GNU GPL. For
details on what this means, please consult the COPYING file.

Level Description Language (Translation Programs)
-------------------------------------------------

These were developed as part of AGRIP and are released under the GNU
GPL, as above.

Quake Engine Map Compilation Tools
----------------------------------

This repo contains a lightly modified copy of John Carmack's "q1tools"
archive, which is also released under the GNU GPL. The modifications
made were to: (1) add compilation steps to the \*nix makefile, so it
builds all of the tools it's possible to build and (2) make the tools
less sensitive to directory structure, so they look in the current
directory for needed resources (i.e.Â the .map and .wad files).

AudioQuake and Level Description Language Documentation
-------------------------------------------------------

The manual for AudioQuake and documentation for LDL are distributed
under the GNU Free Documentation Licence (FDL). A copy of this is
included in an appendix of the AudioQuake manual.
