README.md, before:

AGRIP AudioQuake and Level Description Language (LDL)
======================================================

The Accessible Gaming Rendering Independence Possible (AGRIP) project aims to make mainstream games and development tools accessible to blind and vision-impaired gamers.

**We are in the process of ensuring the code runs on modern platforms and currently it is only supported on the Mac, but Windows support will return ASAP.**

AudioQuake
-----------

AudioQuake is a version of Quake (by id Software) that has enhanced audio and speech output, so that blind and vision-impaired gamers can play it (including a number of the standard maps).  The code is based on the ZQuake engine, is mature and supports various forms of networked play.  A tutorial, documentation and some specifically-designed accessible maps are included.

It is also possible to create mods for the game, by changing the sounds (and other content) and modifying the QuakeC gamecode.  A number of community members have created mods, from "excessive overkill"-style bloodbaths, to the obligatory Star Wars conversions.  The standard modding tools can be used for this, as they are inherently accessible.  For creating maps, read on.

**Note:** You need access to some official Quake data files for the game to work.  The shareware version and an enhanced sound pack are automatically installed if not present.  You can also use the full ("registered") Quake data files too.

Level Description Language
---------------------------

The Level Description Language (LDL) allows people to describe maps for the game using structured text and have the computer automatically create the 3D world.  It is currently at the proof-of-concept stage, but has been used by blind people to make maps for the game.

Commit message:

Robustness on Mac and shared build system work
* Make it compile and not crash on Mavericks (fixes #20).
* Sort out zqcc Mavericks issues (fixes #19).
* Tweak earlier change to `BASE_CFLAGS`.
* Add a shortcut ‘freeze’ script.
* Edit README to reflect status of project.
* Minor clarification for PyGUI to build instructions.
* Added potential debug versions of *nix executables to .gitignore.
* setup.py reads the release number and name from the `release` file.
* Properly give icon to Mac .app bundle.

README.md, after:

AGRIP AudioQuake and Level Description Language
================================================

AudioQuake and the Level Description Language were successful experiments started in 2003 to see if it was possible to make a mainstream First-person Shooter (FPS) accessible to blind and vision-impaired gamers.  We sought to afford access not only to the game, but also to the surrounding community of modding and even the creation of new levels ("maps").

These aims were realised, with the help of the community during 2003, when we focussed on single-player and 2004, when the first networked accessible deathmatches were played and user-made mods were debuted.  Level Description Language (LDL), which allows blind people to architect 3D maps, was released in 2008.

Whilst the original Quake game is no longer mainstream, the experiment was successful (in that a number of single-player maps and many deathmatch maps are accessible, and blind gamers have created additional mods and maps for the game) and the lessons learnt apply equally well to modern FPSs.  Also, we developed some accessibility techniques we'd like to share and that we'd be delighted if others might adopt for their own projects; particularly the Level Description Language as this empowers blind gamers (and its present "90-degree expressiveness" limitation is due only to a lack of advanced geometry on our part).

The aims of this repo are to...

 * ensure it's easier than ever to play AudioQuake and use the Level Description Language;
 * preserve our contribution accessible gaming for the future and
 * to welcome any contributions and improve upon components such as the base game, tools, sounds, and other aspects.

AGRIP stands for "Accessible Gaming Rendering Independence Possible".  For more information and links to academic research papers, visit <http://agrip.org.uk>.

AudioQuake
-----------

AudioQuake is a version of Quake (by id Software) that has enhanced audio and speech output, so that blind and vision-impaired gamers can play it (including a number of the standard maps).  The code is based on the ZQuake engine, is mature and supports various forms of networked play.  A tutorial, documentation and some specifically-designed accessible maps are included.

It is also possible to create mods for the game, by changing the sounds (and other content) and modifying the QuakeC gamecode.  A number of community members have created mods, from "excessive overkill"-style bloodbaths, to the obligatory and most-welcome Star Wars conversions.  The standard modding tools can be used for this, as they are inherently accessible.

You need access to some official Quake data files for the game to work.  The shareware version and an enhanced sound pack are included.  You can also use the full ("registered") Quake data files too.

Level Description Language
---------------------------

The Level Description Language (LDL) allows people to describe maps for the game using structured text and have the computer automatically create the 3D world.  It has some geometrical limitations, as above, but is a robust and fully 3D map creation and styling system and has been used by blind people to make maps for the game.
