audioquake/BUILD.md, before:

Building AudioQuake
===================

Please ensure you've read and followed the steps in [the main BUILD.md file](../BUILD.md) first.

If you want to build AudioQuake separately, and have the development environment set up already, it's as simple as running:

* **Mac:** `./build-audioquake.py`
* **Windows:** `python build-audioquake.py`

What does `build-audioquake.py` do?
-----------------------------------

1. Converts the user manual, sound legend appendix (so it can be referred to separately), development manuals, README and LICENCE files from Markdown to HTML.
2. Runs [PyInstaller](http://www.pyinstaller.org) to "freeze" the Python code (so that it runs like a normal executable, without requiring Python on the player's computer) and combine it with...
   + The engine, gamecode and map compilation tools (built using the "build-giants.py" script in the root directory).
   + The Level Description Language tools (from the "ldl" subdirectory).
   + The AudioQuake game assets (sounds etc.) from this directory.
   + The Remote console client written in Python, also from this directory.

Commit message:

feat: Rounding up Open Quartz & Prototype; Build code & info (#55)
* DRY on the cross-platform and some built code.
* ConfigParser-based INI handling (currently for first-time checks).
* Update docs wrt Open Quartz.
* Don't use custom skins (fixes #11 - again? :-))
* UI labelling tweaks for clarity.
* Update code copyright ranges.
* Re-add GNU Free Documentation Licence (it is in there twice due to two docs that use it).
* Fix heading levels in docs.
* Fix map-building as part of build on Windows (don't flash up command prompt; fix cross-platform logic).
* Slightly less verbosity.
* Update change log.
* Update build instructions wrt Quake textures.

audioquake/BUILD.md, after:

Building AudioQuake
===================

Please ensure you've read and followed the steps in [the main BUILD.md file](../BUILD.md) first.

If you want to build AudioQuake separately, and have the development environment set up already, it's as simple as running:

* **Mac:** `./build-audioquake.py`

* **Windows:** `python build-audioquake.py`

What does `build-audioquake.py` do?
-----------------------------------

1. Converts the user manual, sound legend appendix (so it can be referred to separately), development manuals, README and LICENCE files from Markdown to HTML.

2. Uses the Quake map tools to compile the AGRIP maps (which were originally made with [QuArK](http://quark.sourceforge.net/) for all three different variants of play: Quake, Open Quartz and the "high-contrast" textures from Prototype.wad.

   In Quake, textures are compiled into the ".bsp" files directly from the texture ".wad" files. If this is the first time you're building AudioQuake

3. Runs [PyInstaller](http://www.pyinstaller.org) to "freeze" the Python code (so that it runs like a normal executable, without requiring Python on the player's computer) and combine it with...

   + The engine, gamecode and map compilation tools (built using the "build-giants.py" script in the root directory).

   + The Level Description Language tools (from the "ldl" subdirectory).

   + The AudioQuake game assets (sounds etc.) from this directory.

   + The Remote console client written in Python, also from this directory.
