audioquake/manuals/user-manual-part05.md, before:

# Maps

There are quite a few maps supplied with *AudioQuake* that are extra to those that the shareware and registered versions of *Quake* provide. This part describes them. The description of the tutorial maps has been left a surprise.

## Deathmatch/team deathmatch maps

The AGRIP deathmatch maps all begin with "agdm", then have a number. Some of them end with a letter—"t" indicates the map is a 1on1 arena and "l" indicates a large map.

### agdm01: The Melee

This is a simple map with a large central rectangular room surrounded by a corridor. There is a door on each side of the central room into this corridor (these doors are at one or other extreme of each side; not in the middle). Opposite the middle of each side of the central room, across the corridor, are short corridors with spawnpoints at the ends. You therefore begin the game facing a side of the large central room.

### agdm01t: The Melee—1on1 Edition

This map is as above, but has been adapted for two-player "tournament" games by cutting the number of doors onto the central room, and the number of spawnpoints, from 4 to 2.

### agdm02: Halls of Retribution

A large building with 4 levels. There are stairs between each level that announce the level number you're leaving/arriving at. Some levels have obstacles in them such as crates that are used to hide weapons, ammo and other goodies. The bottom and top levels contain teleporters that increase flow.

The stairs are round the edge of each floor and are arranged such that when you have gone up one set of stairs, you can follow the side of the floor you're around to find the next set.

### agdm02l: Halls of Retribution—Warring Factions Remix

As in the previous level, but there are two buildings with four floors. This may one day make an excellent "Capture The Flag" map!

Commit message:

feat: Open Quartz; High-contrast maps; LDL streamlining (#52)
* Create quake.wad when the user installs the registered data.
* Support Open Quartz as an alternative for playing the game.
* Support creating maps with Quake, Open Quartz and high-contrast (courtesy of Prototype.wad) textures.
* Update config files in both games before playing a game (by copying).
* Build versions of the AGRIP maps made with QuArK for the different texture sets.
* Add option to choose which version of the map to play when built.
* Tidy up the UI on Windows.
* Ensure the build process still works on Windows.
* LDL CLI improvements (quite a bit of DRY).
* Code and directory organisation improvements.
* LDL sound styles are encoded in style.xml now too.
* Support 'patch' styles in LDL (needs documenting).
* Quieter CLI output generally.
* Better platform handling (more to go).

audioquake/manuals/user-manual-part05.md, after:

# Maps

There are quite a few maps supplied with *AudioQuake* that are extra to those that the shareware and registered versions of *Quake* provide. This part describes them. The description of the tutorial maps has been left a surprise.

**Tip:** All of the maps described here can be played in *Quake*, *Open Quartz* and high-contrast mode within either of those games. To load the high-contrast versions, simply append "hc" to the map name when issuing the `map` command in the console (e.g. `map agdm01hc`).

## Deathmatch/team deathmatch maps

The AGRIP deathmatch maps all begin with "agdm", then have a number. Some of them end with a letter—"t" indicates the map is a 1on1 arena and "l" indicates a large map.

### agdm01: The Melee

This is a simple map with a large central rectangular room surrounded by a corridor. There is a door on each side of the central room into this corridor (these doors are at one or other extreme of each side; not in the middle). Opposite the middle of each side of the central room, across the corridor, are short corridors with spawnpoints at the ends. You therefore begin the game facing a side of the large central room.

### agdm01t: The Melee—1on1 Edition

This map is as above, but has been adapted for two-player "tournament" games by cutting the number of doors onto the central room, and the number of spawnpoints, from 4 to 2.

### agdm02: Halls of Retribution

A large building with 4 levels. There are stairs between each level that announce the level number you're leaving/arriving at. Some levels have obstacles in them such as crates that are used to hide weapons, ammo and other goodies. The bottom and top levels contain teleporters that increase flow.

The stairs are round the edge of each floor and are arranged such that when you have gone up one set of stairs, you can follow the side of the floor you're around to find the next set.

### agdm02l: Halls of Retribution—Warring Factions Remix

As in the previous level, but there are two buildings with four floors. This may one day make an excellent "Capture The Flag" map!
